Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance
assessment based on multi-granularity
semantic information
Xiaoxiao Sun1, Siqing Yang1, Chenying Zhao1 and Dongjin
Yu1*
1*School of Computer Science and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi
University, Hangzhou, China.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): yudj@hdu.edu.cn;
Abstract
Business process compliance is an essential part of business process
management, which saves organizations from penalties caused by non-
compliance processes. However, current researches on business process
compliance mainly focus on checking using general constraint rules that
havebeenformalizedwithoutin-depthanalysisofrelatedregulatorydoc-
umentsandmostlyinvolveextensivehumanefforts.Inthispaper,weaim
to propose an automatic and interpretable approach that encompasses
the entire lifecycle of business process compliance. By combining deep
learningandanaturallanguageprocessingapproachbasedonruletem-
plates, we extract semantic information from regulatory documents at
different granularities for subsequent compliance checking. In addition,
we match appropriate rules to the process model and detect the degree
of violation of the business process from three control-flow perspectives.
Theeffectivenessofthismethodisvalidatedontworeal-worlddatasets.
Keywords:ComplianceChecking,ViolationDetection,BusinessProcess,
TextMining,NaturalLanguageProcessing,DeepLearning
1
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
2 Design-time business process compliance assessment
1 Introduction
Business Process Management (BPM) provides a framework to support the
businessprocesslifecyclefrommodeling,configurationandformulationtoeval-
uation[1].BusinessProcessCompliance(BPC)isanessentialpartofbusiness
process management that measures how effectively an organization’s business
processescomplywithallrelevantlaws,regulations,guidelines,andstandards
[2].ExamplesofcriticalregulatorydocumentsaretheHealthInsurancePorta-
bility and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), and
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [3]. Companies that violate
theseregulatorydocumentsrisklosingthetrustofinvestors,incurringfinancial
fines, and facing criminal charges. As a result, adhering to rules from multiple
sourceshasbecomeessentialforeveryorganizationtoavoidhugefinelossesand
also to improve business process transparency [4]. However, in the company’s
practice, checking and ensuring the consistency of the organization’s business
processes with regulatory documents is still largely done manually with lot of
efforts. In addition, the cost of manual review may increase significantly due
to the constant changes in regulatory documents [5, 6].
BPC checking occurs at different stages of the process lifecycle [7]. Dur-
ingdesigntime,processmodelsarecheckedforcompliancewithallapplicable
constraints, thus preventing actual execution of non-compliance processes. At
runtime, instances of the process being executed are continuously monitored
to detect or even predict violations. Finally, in the audit phase, when the
execution of the process instance is finished, BPC is checked against the log
files generated by the system. This paper is dedicated to BPC checking at
design time, i.e., checking violations of process models, as detecting any non-
compliance at the early stage is crucial to saving the enterprise’s effort, time,
and financial resources [3, 5]. In previous studies, researchers have proposed
several BPC methods targeted at process models. However, the checking con-
straintsusedbymostapproachesareasetofpresupposedrulesrecordedusing
formaltechniquessuchasLineartemporallogic(LTL)[8],Eventcalculus(EC)
[9] or Compliance Request language (CRL) [10]. Although several researches
aim to extract process descriptions or compliance constraints from regulator
documents, formalizing legal specifications to precisely capture the semantics
ofthelegaltextsisstillahugechallengethatrequiressignificanthumaneffort
andcomplexmodelinglanguages.Therefore,inthispaper,weplantoproposea
methodthatautomaticallyextractsemanticinformationfromregulatorydoc-
umentsusingnaturallanguageprocessingandmachinelearningmethods,and
further apply the information to perform BPC checking with process models
at the design stage with interpretable results from multiple perspectives.
The contributions of our paper are the following:
1. We propose an automatic method that combines deep learning with rule-
template-based natural language processing to extract semantic rules from
regulatory documents at different granularities.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 3
2. We disassemble the process model according to its structure to obtain
detailed semantic information from its label text, and measure its compli-
ance with extracted rules from (1) to detect three control flow types of
violations.
3. The proposed BPC checking method covers the entire checking process
and gives interpretable results with the warning of violation risks in the
early-stage to avoid greater losses in the future for organizations.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses
related works. Section 3 illustrates the problem and highlights the main
challengesinthiswork.Section4describesourcomplianceassessmentmethod-
ology. Section 5 evaluates and compares the proposed approach with existing
methodsondatasetsandevaluatesourapproachontworealscenariodatasets.
Finally, Section 6 shows the conclusions and future work.
2 Related Works
Inthelastdecade,variousresearcheshavebeenproposedtocheckthecompli-
anceorconformanceofbusinessprocesses.Thesetechniqueshavebeenapplied
in many scenarios, including process queries, legal compliance checks, and
audits.
In previous literature, several techniques for performing BPC checking at
design-time have been proposed to check whether process models adhere to
compliance rules, which are further classified according to their basic tech-
nologies. The first type is logic-based approaches, which applies formal logic
modeling languages to formalize the specification, such as process compli-
ancelogic(PCL)[11], compliancerequestlanguage(CRL)[10],eventcalculus
(EC) [12], and other modeling languages. Pattern-based approaches translate
compliance requirements into easy-to-understand visual patterns or graphics
beforeactualBPCchecking.Forexample,Elgammaletal.[10]usedLTL-based
graphical compliance patterns to model compliance constraints. In addition,
hybrid approaches are also widely applied for BPC checking. Governatori et
al. [13] applied SemanticWeb technology and languages such as LegalRuleML
to manually model legal documents for compliance checking using Regor-
ous, a business process regulatory compliance checker. Recently, Winter et al.
[14] also evaluated compliance between regulatory documents and the BPMN
models using simple textual analysis.
More recent attention has been focused on using advanced natural lan-
guageprocessing(NLP)techniquestocheckforconformancebetweenbusiness
processes and description text. For example, S‘anchez-Ferreres et al. [15] used
existingNLPtechniquestotunetextualdescriptionsandprocessmodels.Del-
icadoetal.[16]introducedanonlineplatformcalledNLP4BPMthatconverts
textual descriptions into BPMN models and vice versa. The platform also
computes the conformance between the textual descriptions and the BPMN
model.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
4 Design-time business process compliance assessment
It is worth mentioning that the extraction of process constraints from nat-
urallanguagetextsisusuallyperformedastheessentialpartinBPCchecking
andisacentralrequirementforapproachesthatautomaticallyextractprocess
modelsfromprocess-orientedtexts[17].Someapproachesaimatelicitingpro-
cessconstraintsfromrule-orientedtexts,suchasrequirementsextractionfrom
documents [18, 19] and declarative process constraints [20]. Specifically, some
extract the structure of documents, while others classify legal passages based
on their normative content [21] and distinguish between terms that belong to
rules [22], and each claims varying degrees of success. Nevertheless, it is chal-
lenging to compare experimental results to the performance claimed in these
researches because neither datasets nor systems are available to assess them.
And according to a survey by Meth et al. [23], most of the existing methods
are manual or semi-automatic.
In this research, motivated by a related issue investigated by Winter et
al. [14], we intend to directly assess the compliance of process models using
regulatory documents, i.e., pulls the required semantic information from reg-
ulatory documents with greater precision before multi-perspective matching
withprocessmodels.Furthermore,theapplicationofadvancedNLPtechniques
addresses the problem of manually modeling compliance constraints in most
BPC checking methods, considerably decreasing labor costs for companies.
3 Preliminaries
In this section, we present some preliminaries for better understanding of our
method.Somebasicdefinitionsaregivenfirstly,followedbyproblemdefinition
of BPC checking.
3.1 Definition
Definition 1 (Process Model Repository, Process Model) A process model
repository M = ⟨m
1
,m
2
,...,mn⟩ contains multiple process models. A pro-
cess model formally represents the business process within the organization in
the form of graphical symbols. Specifically, a process model is a tuple m =
(Am,Em,Gm,Rm,Nm,Fm,Lm,um,tm,fm), where Nm = Am ∪ Em ∪ Gm is a
finite set of nodes, and Am,Em,Gm are a finite set of activities, events and gate-
ways, respectively. Rm is a finite set of actors, and Fm ⊆ Nm ×Nm is the flow
relation and (Nm,Fm) is a connected graph. In addition, um : Am ∪ Em →
{act(Am∪Em),bs−obj(Am∪Em)}mapseachactivityandeventwithitsactionto
abusinessobject,whiletm :G→{and,xor}isamappingthatassociateseachgate-
way with a type, and fm :Rm ↛Am∪Em is a partial function that associates an
actor r∈Rm to an activity a∈Am or an event e∈Em.
Definition 2 (Regulatory Documents Repository, Regulatory Document) A regu-
latory documents repository Γ contains regulatory documents from various sources,
where each regulatory documents e ∈ Γ is a tuple e = (id,t,c), where id is the
document id, t represents the title of the document, and c is the content of the
document.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 5
Definition3(Rulebase,Rulerecord) RulebaseRcomprisesofasetofrulerecords,
where each r ∈ R is denoted as r = (tr,Ar,Pr,Cr,Or,Er,Ur,fr), where tr ∈
{Obligation,Prohibition,Permission,Definition} is the type of rule record. We
utilizeAr,Pr,Cr,Or,Er toindicateasetofaction,actor,condition,constraintand
exception of a rule record r respectively. Ur ∈ Ar ×Ar indicates the sequential
relationship between the actions and a partial function fr : Pr ↛ Ar that specifies
which actors must execute certain actions.
3.2 Problem Definition
The focus of this paper is to extract semantic information of different gran-
ularities from regulatory documents, which are further applied to finish BPC
checking with process models from three different perspectives. The formal
definition of our problem is as follows:
Input:
1. a process model repository: M
2. a regulatory documents repository: Γ
Middle Result:
1. semantic components of process model:
m∈M,m=(A ,E ,G ,R ,N ,F ,L ,u ,t ,f )
m m m m m m m m m m
2. a rule base containing multiple rule record:
r ∈R,r =(t ,A ,P ,C ,O ,E ,U ,f )
r r r r r r r r
Output:
1. a score of missing action violation
2. a score of incorrect actor violation
3. a score of out-of-order execution violation
4 Methods
Figure 1 demonstrates an overview of our method to assess BPC between
process models and regulatory documents at design-time, which consists of
three parts.
1. Process Model Disassembly: This part extracts semantic information from
the labels associated with the process model and extracts related control
flow information. In particular, label parsing aims at extracting business
components, i.e., actions and business objects, from activity and event
labels.
2. Regulatory Documents Parsing: The purpose of the regulatory document
parsing is to classify the constraint rules in the regulatory documents and
extractsemanticinformationfromtheconstraintrules,thuscreatingarule
base containing a number of rule records. Here, a combination of deep
learningandrule-basedNLPmethodisappliedfromdifferentgranularities.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
6 Design-time business process compliance assessment
3. MultipleViolationDetection:Finally,wematchtheprocessmodel’sseman-
tic and control flow information with the rule records in the rule base to
achieve BPC checking. In particular, our approach detects three types of
business process violations, i.e., missing action violations, incorrect actor
violations and out-of-order execution violations.
Node Resource Control Flow
Activity Event Gateway
Process Models 1.Process Model Disassembly Semantic Components Missing Action Violation
3.Multiple Violation Detection Incorrect Actor Violation
Regulatory Documents 2.Regulatory Documents Parsing Rule Base
Out-of-order Execution Violation
Statement-level: modality classification Phrase-level: semantic classification
...
...
...
...
Pre-trained BERT with legal domain corpora Syntactic structure: constituency parsing & dependency parsing
Fig. 1: Overview of the compliance checking approach
4.1 Process Model Disassembly
Design-time BPC checking aims to verify that business processes behave in a
way that complies with all relevant rules, hence preventing the execution of
non-compliance processes. Nowadays, organizations utilize a variety of model-
ing languages to document and standardize business processes, such as Petri
nets, Unified Modeling Language (UML), and Event Driven Process Chain
(EPC).Inthispaper,wemainlyfocusonparsingBPMN,oneofthemostcom-
monly used notations for business processes. However, the proposed approach
is generic and can be applied to other modeling languages.
As shown in Figure 2, a BPMN model consists of three types of nodes:
events, activities, and gateways. Events indicate what happened, which are
shown as circles. Activities are represented by rounded rectangles and are
works performed in a business process. Gateways are responsible for control-
ling how business processes flow, shown as diamonds. These elements can be
groupedintopoolsorchannelsbasedonthesameactors(people,departments,
organizations, etc.). We use the generic definition from Definition 1 to define
the process model. The OR-gateway is not included in this description since
it does not apply to all graph-based modeling notations (e.g., Petri nets) [24].
Here, we intend to extract information about activities, events, gateways,
control flow relationships, and semantic label components from a given pro-
cess model. Specifically, we take the following two semantic components out
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 7
emaNenaL
Data
Object Data Store
emaNlooP
Participants Gateways Activities Events Connectors
Exclusive Start Intermediate End Sequence
Task
Inclusive
Sub-process Message
Message
Parallel Error
Call Activity Cancel
Fig. 2: Informationextractedfromprocessmodelsandregulatorydocuments
of activity and event labels in order to extract their semantic content: the
action describing the step, and the business object that the operation per-
forms. The majority of the information we need can be obtained by applying
Definition 1 because activities, events, gateways, and control flow information
areallexplicitlycontainedinthestructureoftheprocessmodel.However,fur-
ther processing of the natural language information in the labels is required
to extract the semantic components, namely actors, actions, and business
objects.StandardNLPtechniquesprovideinaccurateresultssincetheselabels
aretypicallytextsnippetsratherthancompletesentencesorphrases.In2013,
Leopoldetal.[25]proposedatechniquetodecomposeactivityandeventlabels
utilizing model context analysis and structural knowledge of labels. Here, we
employ a similar technique to extract actions and business objects from the
labels of process models, whose main steps are shown in Figure 3 and will not
be extensively discussed in this paper due to space limitation.
1. Label Style Recognition 2. Label Composition Analysis 3. Semantic Content Derivation
Label Analysis Model Analysis Model Repository Analysis Natural Language Analysis
Fig. 3: Process label analysis
4.2 Regulatory Document Parsing
Regulatory documents do not explicitly describe activities, events, or gate-
waysasprocessmodels.Therefore,allsemanticinformationrelatedtoprocess
model elements must be extracted from the text description using NLP tech-
niques. In this part, the extraction is based on the smallest sentence unit of
regulatory documents as our BPC checking approach attempts to align pro-
cessmodelelementswitheachrelevantrulerecord.Inparticular,weconstruct
a rule base with specific components as Definition 3. To construct the rule
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
8 Design-time business process compliance assessment
base,weextractsemanticinformationofdifferentgranularitiesfromregulatory
documents, as shown in Figure 4. At the statement-level, the sentences from
regulatorydocumentsareclassifiedintodifferentcategoriesofrulerecords,the
method of checking the process models differs according to the different types
of rule records in the subsequent BPC checking. At the phrase-level, phrases
related to process model elements in rule records are extracted for matching
and checking of process models.
Obligation
Statement Prohibition
level
Permission
Definition
Regulatory Documents Sentences Rule Base
Actor
Action
Phrase
Condition
level
Constraint
Exception
Fig. 4: Information extracted from regulatory documents
4.2.1 Statement-level: Modality Classification
Before extracting information from regulatory documents, the types of each
sentence are defined and classified. The focus of this step is to identify defini-
tionalclausesandnormativeclauses.Definitionalclausesareageneralcategory
with sentences that do not define the actor’s behavior. Normative clauses are
further divided into obligation, prohibition, and permission based on deontic
logic concepts [26]. The detailed description of the four categories is shown in
Table 1.
Table 1: The detailed description of the four categories of rule
records
Concept Definition
Obligation Itindicatesasituationinanactoracourseofactiontowhichanindividual
islegallybound.Violationoccurswhenthisconditionisnotmet.
Prohibition Itindicatesasituationinanactoracourseofactionthatwhichanindividual
shouldavoid.Violationoccurswhenthisconditionisnotmet.
Permission It expresses the permission to do something if the opposite obligation or its
prohibitionisnotestablished.Violationoccurswhenthisconditionisnotmet.
Definition Itisalegalprovisionthatdefinesthemeaningofaconcept.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 9
Obligation
Prohibition
Softmax
Permission
Definition Data Transformer
T1 T2 ... TN T1 T2 ... TN
BooksCorous
Bert pre-training model Trn Trn ... Trn
Wikipedia
E1 E2 ... EN
Trn Trn ... Trn
Tok1 Tok2 ... TokN
LegalCorous
E1 E2 ... EN
Regulatory
document
Fig. 5: Modality classification model based on BERT
In previous studies, the distinction between different categories was con-
ducted based on modal verbs such as words like “must”, “should”, “may”
and “should” as auxiliaries. However, in reality, rule records do not necessar-
ily contain these modal verbs. For example, obligatory expressions would use
“be instructed” and “be required” to indicate obligatory. To classify the rule
records more accurately and efficiently, we employ deep learning to imple-
ment modal classification. As one of the most accurate language models for
text classification tasks among the various deep learning models, the Bidirec-
tionalEncoderRepresentationsfromTransformers(BERT)modelhasreceived
a lot of attention [27]. It is a large-scale pre-trained language model based
on transformer that can be independently pre-trained on large datasets and
then fine-tuned for the final target task in a specific domain and a spe-
cific task. Therefore, we utilize BERT and a corpus from the legal area to
achieve sentence-level modality classification employing a pre-training fine-
tuning strategy. The network is further fine-tuned and tested to see if it can
accuratelyrecreatetheclassificationwhenappliedtonewdatawithlabels.We
outline the construction of the classification model in Figure 5.
Inthepre-trainingstage,weusethegeneralcorpusandthelegalcorpusas
the pre-training corpus data. In the fine-tuning stage, we perform supervised
fine-tuning of the pre-trained model with a small amount of labeled data on
our modality classification task. The fine-tuning process involves supervised
training of the model in the labeled dataset, which changes the weight matrix
of the model. The weight matrix of the model will change according to the
trainingparameters,andmultiplesetsoftrainingparametersaresettoenable
the model to achieve the best classification results under the datasets.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
10 Design-time business process compliance assessment
To apply pre-trained and fine-tuned BERT to our modality classification
task, we add a classification layer (i.e., fully connected layer) after the output
layer. The softmax function calculates the output of the classification layer to
obtain the probabilities of the four classes of labels. The label corresponding
to the maximum value of the final probability, i.e., obligation, prohibition,
permission and definition, is the result of the modality classification.
4.2.2 Phrase-level: Semantic Classification
In this step, we extract constraint components that should be used to detect
processmodelviolationsfromthephrase-level.Sinceregulatorydocumentsare
written in formal languages using standardized language styles, we propose
a method to accomplish this task using a query language on the syntactic
parsingtree,basedonself-definedrulesandalexiconofdomain-markedwords.
Specifically, the method includes the following points:
1. Define phrase concepts that match process model elements in Section 3.1.
2. Analyze the text structure features of regulatory documents, discover the
semantic rules for extracting defined phrase concepts, and perform multi-
ple iterations on the semantic rules to improve the accuracy of semantic
information extraction.
3. Developalexiconofmarkerwordsandextendlegaldomain-specificmarker
words to the basic lexicon.
4. Extract phrase-level semantic information from sentences by applying the
combination of semantic rules and extended domain-marked lexicon, com-
bined with classification results into rule records, and a rule base is
constructed.
In order to achieve point (1), we first design six specific semantic concepts
from the rules, i.e., modality, actor, action, condition, constraint, exception,
whose detailed definition is shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Concept definitions
Concept Definition
Modality Theauxiliaryrepresentstheaction’smodality.
Actor Theroleisresponsiblefortheexecutionofanactivity.
Action Thecontentoftheregulations,i.e.whatismandatory/prohibited/permitted.
Condition Theconditionsoftheregulationstatewhentheregulationapplies.
Constraint Therestrictionisplacedontheapplicabilityofalegalprovision.
Exception Thepossibleexceptionsindicatewhentheprovisiondoesnotapply.
According to the six semantic concepts defined, we analyze the text struc-
turefeaturesofregulatorydocumentsandformulaterulesforextractingthese
semantic concept phrases from texts. Before using the rules for extraction,
thetextisparsedfirst.Syntacticparsingmainlyincludesconstituencyparsing
and dependency parsing. While constituent parsing shows the whole sentence
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 11
structure and relationships, dependency parsing only indicates the relation-
shipsbetweenwordsandtheirconstitutes.Thefollowingdetailstheextraction
rules that we design through analysis and iteration to ensure that the rules
areasaccurateaspossible.Thespecificmeaningsofthesymbolsandabbrevi-
ations used in the rules are shown in Table 3. Also, Table 4 shows the maker
words required in the rules.
Table3:Themeaningofthesymbolsandabbreviationsusedinrules
Notion Meaning
A<<B AdominatesB
A<B AimmediatelydominatesB
A$B AisthesisterofB
MD Modal
NP Nounphrase
VP Verbphrase
IN Preposition,
PP Prepositionalphrase
SBAR Subordinateclause
SINV Declarativesentencewithsubject-auxinversion
Table 4: Markers for different concepts
Concept Examples of Markers
Actor physician,expert,company,judge,prosecutor,driver,officer,inspector,...
Condition if,incaseof,providedthat,inthecontextof,who,whosewhich...
Constraint before,after,atleast,atmost,equalto,greatest,smallest,lastof,leastof...
Exception withtheexceptionof,exceptfor,derogation,apartfrom,otherthan,...
Modality: Firstly, the modal auxiliary verb in the sentence is extracted,
that is, the modality. The subsequent extraction of action phrases requires
the modality, which is a crucial step. Rules identify modal (MD) nodes in the
parsing tree that are dominated by verb phrase (VP). At the same time, VP
is immediately dominate by the whole sentence or clause. The following are
the modality extraction rules:
(S <VP) <<MD
((SINV <<S) <VP)<<MD
((SBAR <<S) <VP)<<MD
Actor: For actor extraction, the rules based on the constituent tree alone
are not entirely accurate but require consideration of dependencies within the
sentence.Actorsmustalsoappearinthesubjectorobjectdependenciesdefined
by the rules. Also, the actor must be a noun phrase (NP). The specific rules
are as follows:
subject dependency and NP <(actor marker)
object dependency and passive voice and PP <IN $ (NP <(actor marker))
object dependency and active voice and NP <(actor marker)
Action:Thesingleruleforactiondetectseveryverbphrase(VP)encoun-
tered,exceptthosecontainedinmodality,condition,constraintandexception.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
12 Design-time business process compliance assessment
Therefore, to work correctly, the rule for actions must run after the rules for
the above four concepts:
VP with modality, condition, constraint and exception phrases removed
Condition: To detect the condition phrases, we use rules that check for
nodeswithadominationrelationwithnodescontainingconditionmakerwords
such as “if” or “in case of”. Condition rules are:
SBAR <<(condition marker)
PP <<(condition marker)
Constraint: Constraints usually exist in the form of phrases in the sen-
tence structure of English language. Therefore, it is a noun phrase that
immediatelydominatestheconstraintmarkerwords,oraprepositionalphrase
that the constraint marker words to exist in the form of a preposition. The
constraint extraction rules are as follows:
NP <(constraint marker)
PP <(IN <(constraint marker)) $ NP
Exception:Theextractionstrategyforexceptionphrasesissimilartothat
for conditions. The difference is that these rules consider exception marker
words.
SBAR <<(exception marker)
PP <<(exception marker)
NP <<(IN <exception marker)
Specifically, we give an example to illustrate how to use the designed
rules. A simplified constituent tree for this statement is shown in Figure 6.
The following rule extracts the condition phrase in this statement: SBAR <<
(condition marker). This rule matches any clause (SBAR) that contains a
conditional marker (in our case, the term if).
S
NP VP SBAR
IN S
NP VP
Access must not be granted if authorization is denied.
Fig. 6: Simplified constituent tree of the rule
Foractorextraction,asimplifieddependencytreeforthisstatementisgiven
inFigure7.Theruleextractstheactorphrases:subject dependency and NP <
(actor marker). The rule classifies a noun phrase as an actor if it contains an
actor marker and has a subject dependency (nsubjpass) with the main (root)
verb in the sentence.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 13
nsubjpass
aux Root advcl
Access must not be granted if authorization is denied.
Fig. 7: Simplified dependency tree of the rule
ItisworthnotingthatTable4illustratestheinitialsetsofmakersforsome
of the concepts, and we extend the marker on these initial sets to make them
as complete as possible. We observe that the scope of actors is broad, thus
leadingtoalargesetofpotentialmarkers.Torefinethemarkersforactors,we
analyze all entries in Wiktionary. For condition, constraint and exception, the
markerscomefromourstudy,andthenumberofmarkersfortheseconceptsis
limited. Although it is likely that our study does not capture all possibilities,
we expect that the markers for these concepts will rapidly saturate with use.
4.3 Multiple Violation Detection
After the semantic extraction of process models and regulatory documents,
we conduct a variety of violation detection from the control flow perspective
between the process model components extracted from Section 4.1 and rule
records extracted from Section 4.2, which contains two main steps. First, we
calculatematchingscoretoindicatetheassociationbetweenthetwoandassign
strongly associated rule records to individual process model. Secondly, the
associated process model and rule records are checked for compliance from
multipleperspectivestoderiveviolationscores.Inthissection,weputforward
several related definitions as follows.
Definition4(MatchingScore) Thematchingscoreisusedtomeasuretherelevance
between the process model and the rule records. Given two sets Dr,m and Or,m.
Dr,m ⊆ Ar ×action(Am∪Em),(ar,am) ∈ Dr,m denotes that am is the action
element in the event or activity of process model with the highest similarity to the
elementar oftherulerecord.Or,m ∈Pr×bs obj(Am∪Em)∪Rm,(or,om)∈Or,m
denotes that om is the is the business object element in the event or activity of
process model and actor elements with the highest similarity to the actor of rule
records Or. The matching score is defined as:
(cid:32)(cid:80) (cid:80) (cid:33)
𭟋(r,m,τ)=max (ar,am)∈Dr,m
sim(ar,am)>τ
, (or,om)∈Or,m
sim(or,om)>τ
|Dr,m| |Or,m|
where sim(s ,s ) measures the similarity between two texts s and s , τ ranging
1 2 1 2
from 0 to 1 is set to limit the degree of similarity.
Definition 5 (Missing Action Violation) action violation(r,m,γ) quantifies the
non-compliance of actions in the rule record r that are not executed in the process
model m.
|{(ar,am)∈Dr,m |sim(ar,am)<γ}|
action violation(r,m,γ)=
|Ar|
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
14 Design-time business process compliance assessment
where γ ranging from 0 to 1 is set to limit the degree of action’s similarity.
Definition 6 (Incorrect Actor Violation) executor violation(r,m,ϑ) captures the
actor violations in the process model m.
| (cid:8) r∈Rr,m,γ |∃r′ ∈Cr,m,γ,sim (cid:0) r,r′(cid:1) <ϑ (cid:9) |
actor violation(r,m,γ,ϑ)=
|Rr,m,γ|
Rr,m,γ ={g∈Pr |∃(ar,am)∈Dr,m,fr(g)=ar∧sim(ar,am)>γ}
Cr,m,γ ={r∈bs−obj(Am∪Em)∪Rm |∃g∈Rr,m,γ,sim(fr(g),fm(r))>γ}
where Rr,m,γ is the set of the actors in the rule records assigned to an activity for
which there exists a equivalent task in the process model, C contains the actors in
theprocessmodelthatperformthesameactionasintherulerecord,andϑranging
from 0 to 1 is set to limit the degree of actor’s similarity.
Definition 7 (Out-of-order Execution Violation) The out-of-order execution viola-
tion scores between the model and the paragraph are calculated as follows.
orderviolation(r,m,γ)
= |Ur,m,γ|−|(cid:8)(cid:0)ur,u′ r (cid:1)∈Ur,m,γ|∃(cid:8)(ur,um)∈Dr,m,(cid:0)u′ r,u′ m (cid:1)∈Dr,m (cid:9),(um,u′ m)∈Fm∧(cid:0)u′ m,um (cid:1)∈/Fm (cid:9)|
|Ur,m,γ|
Ur,m,γ=(cid:8)(cid:0)ur,u′
r
(cid:1)∈Ur|∃(cid:8)(ur,um)∈Dr,m,(cid:0)u′ r,u′
m
(cid:1)∈Dr,m (cid:9),sim(ur,um)>γ∧sim(cid:0)u′ r,u′
m
(cid:1)>γ(cid:9)
where (cid:0) ur,u′ r (cid:1) ∈ Ur is a sequential constraint extracted from the rule record and
(ur,um), (cid:0) u′
r
,u′
m
(cid:1) ∈ Dr,m. Ur,m,γ indicates that the similarity between the rule
record and the operation in the process model is equivalent when the similarity is
greater than the threshold γ. If the process model executes in the prescribed order,
thenthereisonlyonepathfromttot′ inthemodel,i.e.,(um,u′
m
)∈Fm,whilethe
opposite is not satisfied, i.e., (um,u′
m
)∈/ Fm.
Theabilitytomeasurethesimilaritybetweensemanticrulesextractedfrom
thesentenceandprocessmodelsiscriticaltotheperformanceofourapproach.
Weuseexistingsemanticsimilaritytocalculatesim(S ,S )∈[0,1]toreferto
1 2
the quantification of the similarity between semantic components. Moreover,
wesetathresholdγ suchthatifsim(S ,S )>γ ,thenthetwosemantic
sim 1 2 sim
components are considered equivalent. Moreover, we have the flexibility to
adjust the threshold γ to adjust the degree of similarity required for two
sim
semantic components to be considered equivalent.
Based on the above similarity calculations between semantic components,
wedefineamatchingscoreinDefinition4,whichaimstoquantifyhowrelated
a rule record is to the model. The higher the matching score, the more impor-
tant it is to check the process model against that rule record. After getting
the strongly correlated rules, we check the compliance of the process model
based on these rules, which are calculated in Definition 5, 6, 7. According
to the violation scores, the relevant personnel of the company can check the
model in a targeted manner and make modifications to prevent subsequent
non-compliance behaviors.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 15
5 Experiment and Evaluation
This section presents our evaluation experiments, i.e., evaluation of modality
classification, sematic classification, and compliance checking. Due to the fact
that the process model disassembly is relatively simple, we will not conduct
furtherevaluationofitsresultinthissection.Inthelastpart,wedemonstrate
a case study to show the results of our approach more clearly.
5.1 Evaluation of Modality Classification
5.1.1 Experimental Setup
This section describes the implementation, dataset, baselines, settings, and
metrics used to perform the regulatory document modality classification
evaluation experiment.
Implementation:Weconductourexperimentsona10-coreIntel(R)Core
(TM) i9-7900X CPU @ 3.30GHz and 64GB of RAM. In addition, the model
is implemented in the PyTorch deep learning framework, configured with a
CUDA environment of CUDA11.1 and the CUDNN7.5 deep learning library
to accelerate GPU computation.
Dataset: The dataset used to train the machine learning model in this
project is from the publicly available dataset [28]. The dataset is constructed
from the publicly available Austrian Income Tax Code1. The sentences in the
collected text were divided into four categories and labeled 0-3 for each of
these four categories, i.e., definition, obligation, prohibition, and permission.
We randomly divided the dataset into a training set and a test set in a ratio
of 9:1 to have as many sentences as possible in the test set.
Evaluation metrics: We use Precision, Recall and F-Score to measure
the classification results, which are accurate measures of model performance
even when the data is skewed. These metrics are defined as follows:
TP
Precision=
TP +FP
TP
Recall=
TP +FN
2∗Precision∗Recall
F1−Score=
Precision+Recall
where TP is the number of true positives, FP is the number of false
positives and FN is the number of false negatives.
5.1.2 Classification Results
In order to demonstrate the superiority of our pre-training method with
legal corpus and fully examine the effects of different pre-trained models
on classification results, we conduct a comparative analysis with all the
pre-training models, i.e., domain pre-trained models “bert-legal-cased” and
1Availableathttps://ris.bka.gv.at/eli/bgbl/1988/400/P0/NOR40205159
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
16 Design-time business process compliance assessment
Table 5: Structure and parameters of different pre-trained models
Pretraining Data Model Layers Hiddens Parameters
bert-base-uncased 12 768 110M
BookCorpusand bert-base-cased 12 768 110M
EnglishWikipedia bert-large-uncased 24 1024 340M
bert-large-cased 24 1024 340M
Documentsof
bert-legal-uncased 12 768 110M
EUlegislation
bert-legal-cased 12 768 110M
Table 6: Classification results of different pre-trained models
Model Precision Recall F1
bert-base-uncased 90.8% 89.6% 88.7%
bert-base-cased 86.7% 87.6% 84.1%
bert-large-uncased 89.4% 91.3% 86.7%
bert-large-cased 88.8% 89.7% 89.0%
bert-legal-uncased 92.1% 94.1% 89.3%
bert-legal-cased 91.3% 93.3% 88.5%
“bert-legal-uncased” and other pre-trained models “bert-base-cased”, “bert-
base-uncased”, “bert-large-cased” and “bert-large-uncased”. The pre-trained
models ending with “uncased” converts all input text to lowercase to reduce
the effect of letter case on the classification effect compared with pre-trained
models ending with “cased”. The “bert-large-uncased” model contains more
parameters than the other models. Table 5 compares the pre-training data,
structure, and parameters of these pre-trained models.
Moreover, to illustrate the superiority of the performance of the classifica-
tionmodelobtainedafterfine-tuningthepre-trainedBERTmodel,wecompare
our method with the following three commonly used classification methods:
CF : This baseline uses a traditional classification method that simply
KW
uses keywords to determine the type of text.
CF [29]:ThisbaselineutilizesRNNfortextclassification.Itiscommon
RNN
to use RNN and its extended models to process text sequence models. Here
we use bidirectional LSTM for text classification.
CF [30]: This baseline utilizes CNN for text classification. CNN is a
CNN
class of deep, feed-forward artificial neural networks that use a variation of
multilayer perceptrons designed to require minimal preprocessing.
Table 6 compares the results of the different pre-trained models after
fine-tuning. The results in the table show that the pre-trained model using
with legal corpus and ignoring letter case works best, while increasing the
complexity of the model does not significantly improve the classification
results.
We compare the classification method using the pre-trained model “bert-
legal-uncased” with other methods, and the results are presented in Table
7. From the results in the table, it can be concluded that our method out-
performs other methods in terms of precision, recall and f1-score, where the
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 17
Table 7: Classification results of different model methods
Model Precision Recall F1-score
CFKW 62.7% 64.7% 60.8%
CFRNN 90.3% 91.6% 90.9%
CFCNN 87.4% 90.1% 90.2%
Ourclassificationapproach 92.1% 94.1% 93.1%
lowest accuracy is CF achieved using the keyword method. BERT is a bi-
KW
directional language model with attention mechanism, which can better focus
on the contextual relationship in the text. The model has more vital lan-
guage expression ability through pre-training with extensive corpus data than
traditional machine learning algorithms. At the same time, our method uses
domain-specific corpora for pre-training to achieve better results than other
deep learning methods.
5.2 Evaluation of Semantic Classification
This section describes the experimental setup of the method used to extract
semantic components from sentences of regulatory documents and the presen-
tation of the results.
5.2.1 Experimental Setup
Implement: Our extraction rules were implemented using Tregex patterns,
Tsurgeonoperations[31],andJava.Theserulesareparsedusingtheoutputof
aclassicalNLPpipeline.Theyarefullyautomatedandrequirenohumaninter-
vention to preprocess sentences. The Stanford CoreNLP [32] pipeline is used
to perform typical NLP pre-processing tasks, including tokenization, sentence
segmentation, part-of-speech tagging, and constituency parsing.
Dataset: Similarly, we constructed the dataset using the Austrian income
tax law used in the previous experiments. We selected 150 of these sentences
forannotationasgroundtruth.Theselectedsentencesweretypicallycomplete,
sequential, comprised a legal act, and were longer than 20 words. One of the
authors annotated 150 sentences used in the evaluation, and another author
independently annotated 10% of these statements to check the reliability of
the manual annotations.
Evaluation metrics: Each phrase-level annotation has two parameters:
type and span. The former specifies the concept and the latter specifies
where the phrase starts and ends in the statement. We evaluate the results
of automatic phrase-level semantic information extraction using the follow-
ing concepts: A phrase is matched if the computed span of the phrase has a
non-empty intersection with some ground-truth phrase of the same type. If
thecalculatedannotationsdonotmatch,theyaremisclassified.Ground-truth
phrases that do not match are considered as missed.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
18 Design-time business process compliance assessment
5.2.2 Classification Results
Foreachconcept,weprovidethenumberofmatches,thenumberofmisclassi-
fiedphrases,thenumberofmissedphrases,andtheprecisionandrecallscores.
Eachmatchingphrasecountsasatruepositivephrase(TP);eachmisclassified
phrase counts as a false positive phrase (FP), and each missed phrase counts
as a false negative phrase (FN). Precision and recall were calculated using the
same formulae as shown in Table 8.
Table 8: Extraction results of each concept
Concept GroundExtractedMatchedMisclassifiedMissed PrecisionRecall
Truth (TP) (FP) (FN)
Modality 82 81 80 1 2 98.8% 97.6%
Actor 118 110 109 1 9 99.1% 92.4%
Action 147 147 145 2 2 98.6% 98.6%
Condition 46 40 40 0 6 100% 86.9%
Constraint 35 38 34 4 1 89.5% 97.1%
Exception 15 15 14 1 1 93.3% 93.3%
Overall 443 431 422 9 21 97.9% 95.3%
Overall, of the 443 extracted phrase components, 422 were correctly
matched and 9 (2.1%) were misclassified. There are 21 ground-truth phrase
components (4.7%) that were missed by the extraction rules due to incorrect
classificationorimpossibleclassification.Theimpossibilityofclassificationwas
mainly due to parser errors or to missing Tregex patterns (or makers) that
were either too sparse or uncertain. We obtained an overall precision of 97.9%
and an overall recall of 95.3%. This means that our method can extract the
phrase components we need with a high precision. Therefore, it provides a
more accurate semantics for compliance checking.
5.3 Evaluation of Violation Detection
The evaluation experiments in this section include two real-life cases that
demonstrate the validity of the proposed matching score and the three types
of violation scores in our methodology, respectively. We implemented a proto-
type in Python3 with a set of BPMN files, i.e., process models, as input, and
a set of txt files, i.e., the text of regulatory documents, as input. Specifically,
Section 5.3.1 reports experiments conducted for an Austrian energy supplier
and presents the first scenario of verifying the correctness of matching score
betweenprocessmodelsandtherulerecords.Section5.3.2describestheexper-
iment of the second scenario in the context of GDPR implementation, that is,
thewholeprocessincludingmatchingandcheckingofthreekindsofviolations.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 19
5.3.1 Evaluation of Matching
This section demonstrates the first scenario for the process models to match
the relevant rule records, thus verifying the accuracy of the matching scores.
Input. The input consists of a repository of 12 process models that were
built and validated by domain experts in earlier work [33] and correspond in
a one-to-many relationship to a rule base parsed from regulatory documents
related to smart meters in an Austrian energy supplier.
Evaluation Strategy. We quantify our approach’s accuracy using com-
mon measures for recommender systems [34]: The average precision (AP) per
model, as well as the mean average precision (MAP) for the whole model
repository, defined as:
(cid:80)
AP@γ = 1 (cid:88) j∈Ωm h|(r mj <r mi |)+1
Ω r
m
i∈Ωm
mi
(cid:80)
AP@γ
MAP@γ = m∈M
|M|
where Ω denotes the number of rule records that correctly correspond to
m
each process model, r denotes the position of rule record r in the matching
mi i
list, and r <r denotes that rule record r is ranked before rule record r
mj mi j i
in the matching list.
Table9:APofthemodelatdifferentτ andMAPofthewholesystem
Model τ=0.0 τ=0.2 τ=0.4 τ=0.6 τ=0.8 τ=0.9
ProcessModel1 0.546 0.577 0.664 0.702 0.802 0.697
ProcessModel2 0.607 0.613 0.762 0.802 0.892 0.712
ProcessModel3 0.556 0.608 0.675 0.722 0.811 0.708
ProcessModel4 0.453 0.523 0.588 0.634 0.678 0.596
ProcessModel5 0.532 0.644 0.677 0.723 0.801 0.689
ProcessModel6 0.654 0.678 0.675 0.887 0.790 0.648
ProcessModel7 0.670 0.701 0.747 0.777 0.889 0.762
ProcessModel8 0.598 0.643 0.665 0.700 0.874 0.735
ProcessModel9 0.638 0.649 0.675 0.732 0.812 0.717
ProcessModel10 0.666 0.690 0.745 0.812 0.799 0.702
ProcessModel11 0.632 0.666 0.735 0.755 0.790 0.694
ProcessModel12 0.644 0.687 0.702 0.796 0.675 0.655
Overall(MAP) 0.600 0.640 0.693 0.754 0.801 0.693
Results. For the matching scores, the AP and MAP results are shown in
Table9.Inthetable,APisusedtomeasureeachmodelunderdifferentvalues
of τ, and MAP is used to measure the matching quality of the whole system
under different values of τ. 9 of the 12 models had the best overall matching
when τ = 0.8, and 3 models had the best results when τ = 0.6. It can be
seen that the overall accuracy of our method is relatively high in terms of the
matching results.
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
20 Design-time business process compliance assessment
5.3.2 Evaluation of Checking
In this section, we thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness of our method on
another real-world dataset. We use four process models as input that capture
how the main privacy constraints of GDPR are enforced in processes [35].
Furthermore, as the regulatory documents, we use GDPR Articles 1 to 50,
of which Articles 1 to 4 contain the introductory statement while Articles 5
to50containtheregulatorydescriptionsofthefourmodels.Incontract,Arti-
cle 51 and above applies to regulators rather than business organizations and
are therefore outside the scope of our checking. Based on these four process
models and 50 articles, we manually constructed a collection of process mod-
els containing violations. First, the process model is supplemented to make
the process model fully compliant. For the missing action violation, we delete
the activity if it exists in the model. For the incorrect actor violation, if the
actoriscorrectinthemodel,itismanuallymodified.Andfortheout-of-order
execution violation, the positions between activities are swapped. Each check-
ing contains only one violation. The violation data for each model is shown in
Table 10.
Table 10: Details of the violation assessment dataset
Model #Matching #Missing #Incorrect #Out-of-order
rules Action Actor Execution
BPMN1 21 7 5 9
BPMN2 30 9 8 13
BPMN3 38 12 10 16
BPMN4 46 23 9 16
Thefourprocessmodelsarematchedwiththerulerecordsintherulebase,
and the specific results are shown in Table 11. As with the evaluation results
in Section 5.3.1, the process model matches the rule records with the highest
accuracy when τ=0.8.
Table 11: AP of the model at different τ and MAP of the whole
system
Model τ=0.2 τ=0.4 τ=0.6 τ=0.8 τ=0.9
BPMN1 0.503 0.598 0.712 0.824 0.675
BPMN2 0.599 0.637 0.785 0.855 0.713
BPMN3 0.572 0.675 0.783 0.845 0.745
BPMN4 0.523 0.600 0.755 0.835 0.722
Overall(MAP) 0.549 0.628 0.759 0.840 0.714
Due to the fact that the proposition of our method is inspired by Winter
et al., which uses keyword to identify sentence types and applies all clauses
as what needs to be checked without in-depth extraction of phrases, we fur-
ther compared the results of this method with our method, and the results
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 21
are shown in Table 12. From the table, we can see that their method has a
slightlyhigherrecallthanourmethod,butourmethodhasahigherprecision.
The main reason for the phenomena is that their method uses all clauses for
checking without filtering, which correspond to the ability to identify more
violations and a higher recall. However, this practice will lead to the fact that
more non-violations are detected as violations, which lowers their precision
andthussignificantlyincreasesthesubsequentmanualcheckingeffortreduces
for the misidentification. Our approach, on the other hand, conduct effective
classification on both statement level and phrase level with more advanced
technique, which is able to detect violations in a more precise way. There-
fore, in terms of precision and assistance with follow-up work, our strategy is
superior to that of Winter et al.
Table 12: Comparison of accuracy
Methods Precision Recall F-score
Winteretal.(2020)[14] 0.58 0.89 0.70
Ourmethod 0.77 0.83 0.80
Fig. 8: Precision of each model in detecting violation for different γ
Furthermore,weexaminehowvariousthresholdsaffecttheprecisionofvio-
lationdetection.Weanalyzetwocategoriesofviolationstogether(i.e.,missing
actionandout-of-orderexecution)sincetheaccuracyofthesetwocategoriesis
solely connected to the value of γ. The accuracy results of the four models at
different values of γ are shown in Figure 8. From the figure, we can conclude
that for most models, the highest precision of violation detection is reached
when γ = 0.8. However, for model 4, the precision is highest when γ = 0.6.
The reason is that model 4 has the highest complexity, which identifies more
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
22 Design-time business process compliance assessment
violations when γ becomes higher, i.e., with stricter conditions, thus identi-
fying normal operations as violations and decreasing the precision. This also
explains why the precision is lower when γ = 0.9 than that when γ = 0.8.
Fig. 9: Precision of each model in detecting incorrect actor violation for dif-
ferent ϑ
Fortheincorrectactorviolation,itsprecisionisinfluencedbybothγ andϑ,
andwediscussitsprecisionseparately.Accordingtotheresultsofthefirsttwo
violations affected by the γ, the precision is better when γ=0.8. Therefore, we
exploretheinfluenceoftheincorrectactorviolationonthevariationofϑwhen
γ=0.8. The results are shown in Figure 9, with the horizontal axis indicating
the value of ϑ.Two of the four models have the highest precision when ϑ=0.8,
and the other two have the highest precision when ϑ=0.7. The reason is that
the latter two models are larger with more content, the similarity of the text
decreasesincomplexsituations.Therefore,forcomplexprocessmodels,alower
threshold ϑ will lead to better results. Additionally, according to analysis, we
found that the similarity between actors in the latter two models and those in
the rules was lower, leading to a decrease in precision when the threshold was
increased.
5.4 Case Study
To demonstrate the results of our entire approach more clearly, we use the
example of a phone company’s process for acquiring a new customer as case
studyinthissection(Agostinellietal.,2019).Wewillgiveasimpleexplanation
of the business process model. First, the phone company requests new data
fromthecustomerandverifiesthatthedataiscorrect.Ifthecustomerdecides
to change the phone number, the phone company will communicate with the
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 23
originalphonecompanyandsignacontractwiththecustomer.Aftercomplet-
ingtheabovestepsandreceivingpayment,thephonecompanysendstheSIM
card to the customer and activates it. If for any reason the process takes more
than30daystocomplete,theprocesswillbeterminated.Thecompanymodels
the process of acquiring new customers in the design-time to obtain a BPMN
model as in Figure 10, and we intend to conduct BPC checking between this
model against regulatory documents from various sources, including company
regulationsandGDPR,afewinstancesofwhicharebrieflyprovidedTable13.
Table 13: Rules relevant with the process from different sources
ID Sources Rules
Company
R1 The process of phone company must be terminated if it takes more
regulation
than30daysforanyreason.
Company
R2 Afterreceivingthecustomer’spersonalinformation,itisnecessaryto
regulation
verifythecorrectnessoftheirpersonalinformation.
Company
R3 When the customer receives the sim card, the phone company must
regulation
activatethesimcardsothatthecustomercanusethesimcardnor-
mally.
R4 GDPR Before retrieving any kind of personal data from the Data Subject,
theDataControllerhastoasktheDataSubjectforconsent.
The detailed BPC checking results of our method are shown in Figure
10. It can be seen that for both rules R1 and R4, we detect missing action
violations. According to our results, analysts can modify the process model
after the analysis. For Violation 1 with R1, a sub-process needs to be added
to the process model, which terminates the process when the execution time
exceeds 30 days. For Violation 4 with R4, the activity of asking for consent
is added to the original process model. For the rule with R2, we detected
the out-of-order execution violation. To address this violation, the activity
of check the correctness of personal data should be added after the personal
data has been obtained. Finally, we detect the incorrect actors violation with
R3. According to this rule, the SIM card should be activated by the phone
company, not the customer himself. It is worth noting that R4 is a rule from
the GDPR that differs from the previous company regulation. When checking
the process model, we have to manually convert the actors in the rule records
because its actors are not specific but related to a class of actors. In this case,
we need to convert the “Data Controller” to the “phone company” and the
“Data Controller” to the “user” before checking.
6 Conclusion
Inthispaper,wedesignanautomaticcomplianceassessmentmethodbetween
process models and regulatory documents, namely design-time BPC check-
ing. To this end, we propose a general NLP approach that combines deep
learning with rule-based method to extract semantic information related to
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
24 Design-time business process compliance assessment
Activate
SIM card
per R so eq n u al e s d t a ta por A ta s b k il ity new A s n s u ig m n b er Sign contract p R a e y q m ue e s n t t SI S M e n c d a rd
Ask Ask portability old number third party
rehtonA
ynapmoC
enohP
enohP ynapmoC
Not
requested
N a e c w qu c i l r i e e d nt Requested Granted P re a c y e m iv e e n d t
Personal data
received Store Data Not
granted
Data Store
Personal data
remotsuC
ID: Violation 2 ID: Violation 1 ID: Violation 3
Corresp.Rule: R2 Corresp.Rule: R1 Corresp.Rule: R3
Volition Type: Missing Action Volition Type: Missing Action Volition Type: Incorrect Actor
Receive
SIM card
New client Request Send personal data Request Payment
ID: Violation 4
Corresp.Rule: R4
Volition Type: Out-of-order Execution
Fig. 10: Visualrepresentationofresultsofprocessmodelcompliancechecking
process models from regulatory documents and construct a structured rule
base on which to assess the compliance of process models. To improve the
interpretability of our approach, we evaluate the process model from three
different violation perspectives. The effectiveness of our approach has been
demonstrated in two real-world datasets.
In the future, we intend to provide modification suggestions after checking
violations rather than plain scores, so that process modelers can have more
references for modifications and further reduce manual checking costs.
Ethical Approval
Not Applicable.
Availability of supporting data
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
TheworkissupportedbyNaturalScienceFoundationofChina(No.61472112),
NaturalScienceFoundationofZhejiangProvince(No.LQ20F020017)andthe
Key Science and Technology Project of Zhejiang (No. 2020C01165).
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 25
Authors’ contributions
Xiaoxiao Sun came up with the concept, method and wrote the main
manuscript. Siqing Yang conducted the experiments, performed analysis and
wrote the orginal draft. Chenying Zhao helped in conducting the experiments
andvisulizingtheresults.DongjinYucameupwiththeconceptandsupervised
the whole process. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
TheworkissupportedbyNaturalScienceFoundationofChina(No.61472112),
NaturalScienceFoundationofZhejiangProvince(No.LQ20F020017)andthe
Key Science and Technology Project of Zhejiang (No. 2020C01165).
References
[1] VanDerAalst,W.M.:Businessprocessmanagementdemystified:Atuto-
rial on models, systems and standards for workflow management. In:
Advanced Course on Petri Nets, pp. 1–65 (2003). Springer
[2] Kharbili, M.e., Medeiros, A.K.A.d., Stein, S., van der Aalst, W.M.: Busi-
ness process compliance checking: Current state and future challenges.
Modellierung betrieblicher Informationssysteme (MobIS 2008) (2008)
[3] Hashmi, M., Governatori, G., Lam, H.-P., Wynn, M.T.: Are we done
with business process compliance: state of the art and challenges ahead.
Knowledge and Information Systems 57(1), 79–133 (2018)
[4] Syed Abdullah, N., Sadiq, S., Indulska, M.: Emerging challenges in
information systems research for regulatory compliance management. In:
International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering,
pp. 251–265 (2010). Springer
[5] Ly, L.T., Maggi, F.M., Montali, M., Rinderle-Ma, S., Van Der Aalst,
W.M.: Compliance monitoring in business processes: Functionalities,
application, and tool-support. Information systems 54, 209–234 (2015)
[6] Rinderle-Ma, S., Kabicher-Fuchs, S.: An indexing technique for compli-
ance checking and maintenance in large process and rule repositories
(2016)
[7] Governatori,G.,Sadiq,S.W.:Thejourneytobusinessprocesscompliance.
In: Handbook of Research on Business Process Modeling (2009)
[8] Brunello, A., Montanari, A., Reynolds, M.: Synthesis of ltl formulas from
natural language texts: State of the art and research directions. In: 26th
International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning
(TIME 2019) (2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
26 Design-time business process compliance assessment
[9] Shanahan, M.: The event calculus explained. In: Artificial Intelligence
Today (1999)
[10] Elgammal,A.,Turetken,O.,vandenHeuvel,W.-J.,Papazoglou,M.:For-
malizingandapplingcompliancepatternsforbusinessprocesscompliance.
Software & Systems Modeling 15(1), 119–146 (2016)
[11] Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.: Norm compliance in business process mod-
eling. In: International Workshop on Rules and Rule Markup Languages
for the Semantic Web, pp. 194–209 (2010). Springer
[12] Montali,M.,Maggi,F.M.,Chesani,F.,Mello,P.,Aalst,W.M.v.d.:Moni-
toring business constraints with the event calculus. ACM transactions on
intelligent systems and technology (TIST) 5(1), 1–30 (2014)
[13] Governatori, G., Hashmi, M., Lam, H.-P., Villata, S., Palmirani, M.:
Semantic business process regulatory compliance checking using legal-
ruleml. In: European Knowledge Acquisition Workshop, pp. 746–761
(2016). Springer
[14] Winter, K., Aa, H.v.d., Rinderle-Ma, S., Weidlich, M.: Assessing the
compliance of business process models with regulatory documents. In:
International Conference on Conceptual Modeling, pp. 189–203 (2020).
Springer
[15] S`anchez-Ferreres, J., Burattin, A., Carmona, J., Montali, M., Padr´o, L.:
Formalreasoningonnaturallanguagedescriptionsofprocesses.In:Inter-
nationalConferenceonBusinessProcessManagement,pp.86–101(2019).
Springer
[16] Delicado Alc´antara, L., Sanchez-Ferreres, J., Carmona Vargas, J., Padr´o,
L.:Nlp4bpm:naturallanguageprocessingtoolsforbusinessprocessman-
agement. In: BPM Demo and Industrial Track 2017 Proceedings, pp. 1–5
(2017)
[17] Sinha, A., Paradkar, A.: Use cases to process specifications in business
process modeling notation. In: 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Web Services, pp. 473–480 (2010). IEEE
[18] Dragoni, M., Villata, S., Rizzi, W., Governatori, G.: Combining nlp
approachesforruleextractionfromlegaldocuments.In:1stWorkshopon
MIning and REasoning with Legal Texts (MIREL 2016) (2016)
[19] Selway,M.,Grossmann,G.,Mayer,W.,Stumptner,M.:Formalisingnatu-
rallanguagespecificationsusingacognitivelinguistic/configurationbased
approach. Information Systems 54, 191–208 (2015)
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Design-time business process compliance assessment 27
[20] Aa, H.v.d., Ciccio, C.D., Leopold, H., Reijers, H.A.: Extracting declara-
tive process models from natural language. In: International Conference
on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, pp. 365–382 (2019).
Springer
[21] Biagioli, C., Francesconi, E., Passerini, A., Montemagni, S., Soria, C.:
Automaticsemanticsextractioninlawdocuments.In:Proceedingsofthe
10thInternationalConferenceonArtificialIntelligenceandLaw,pp.133–
140 (2005)
[22] Sleimi, A., Sannier, N., Sabetzadeh, M., Briand, L., Ceci, M., Dann, J.:
An automated framework for the extraction of semantic legal metadata
from legal texts. Empirical Software Engineering 26(3), 1–50 (2021)
[23] Meth, H., Brhel, M., Maedche, A.: The state of the art in automated
requirements elicitation. Information and Software Technology 55(10),
1695–1709 (2013)
[24] Quishpi,L.,Carmona,J.,Padr´o,L.:Extractingannotationsfromtextual
descriptionsofprocesses.In:InternationalConferenceonBusinessProcess
Management, pp. 184–201 (2020). Springer
[25] Leopold, H.: Natural language in business process models. PhD thesis,
Springer (2013)
[26] McNamara, P.: Deontic logic. In: Logic and the Modalities in the
Twentieth Century (2006)
[27] Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., Toutanova, K.: Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018)
[28] Michel, M., Djurica, D., Mendling, J.: Identification of decision rules
from legislative documents using machine learning and natural language
processing. In: HICSS, pp. 1–10 (2022)
[29] Li, J., Luong, M.-T., Jurafsky, D.: A hierarchical neural autoencoder for
paragraphs and documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.01057 (2015)
[30] Chen, Y.: Convolutional neural network for sentence classification. Mas-
ter’s thesis, University of Waterloo (2015)
[31] Levy, R., Andrew, G.: Tregex and tsurgeon: Tools for querying and
manipulating tree data structures. In: LREC, pp. 2231–2234 (2006).
Citeseer
[32] Manning, C.D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J.R., Bethard, S.,
Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
28 Design-time business process compliance assessment
McClosky, D.: The stanford corenlp natural language processing toolkit.
In:Proceedingsof52ndAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputa-
tional Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 55–60 (2014)
[33] B¨ohmer, K., Rinderle-Ma, S.: Multi-perspective anomaly detection in
business process execution events. In: OTM Confederated International
Conferences” On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems”, pp. 80–98
(2016). Springer
[34] Schr¨oder, G., Thiele, M., Lehner, W.: Setting goals and choosing metrics
forrecommendersystemevaluations.In:UCERSTI2Workshopatthe5th
ACMConferenceonRecommenderSystems,Chicago,USA,vol.23,p.53
(2011)
[35] Agostinelli, S., Maggi, F.M., Marrella, A., Sapio, F.: Achieving gdpr
compliance of bpmn process models. In: International Conference on
Advanced Information Systems Engineering, pp. 10–22 (2019). Springer
